on-memes/index.md, before:

---
title: On Memes
layout: layout
---

This is my attempt to wrap my head around memes.

---

The word "*meme*" was coined by Richard Dawkins. He wanted a short hand way of
describing a "replicator", a unit of self-perpetuation. His primary context
for using this was genetics and evolutionary theory. A gene / replicator /
meme is successful if it is able to spread wide enough among a
population such that it becomes ubiquitous within that population.

*"We need a name for the new replicator, a noun that conveys the idea of a unit
of cultural transmission, or a unit of imitation. 'Mimeme' comes from a
suitable Greek root, but I want a monosyllable that sounds a bit like 'gene'.
TYGO DANS classicist friends will forgive me if I abbreviate mimeme to meme.
If it is any consolation, it could alternatively be thought of as being
related to 'memory', or to the French word même. It should be pronounced to
rhyme with 'cream'."* - Dawkins, Richard (1989), The Selfish Gene (2 ed.),
Oxford University Press, p. 192, ISBN 0-19-286092-5,

Now the term has mutated (as only a replicator can) into any idea, concept or
fad which spreads quickly in society, usually using the internet as its
transmission medium. More specifically, *meme* refers to that particular
combination of image and witty(ish) or humorous caption. It is this class of
meme that I want to understand.

---

We know them when we see them, but why they have become so ubiquitous is a
much more interesting question than what they are. Especially in the age of
the internet and social media, they are so commonplace that we don't really
stop and think why we use them, or what we use them for. The usual reaction
to a meme is to elicit a shallow grin, nod of approval (usually accompanied by
a turn down of the jowls), teeth sucking or an insincere and exaggerated 
expression of shock at the "truth" of the meme.

So here are some questions I have:
- What are the criteria for a meme being successful?
- Given the context in which they are used, why are they used?
- Why do certain memes take on more significance for different internet
  subcultures?
- What do we gain from using them? What do we loose?
- What do we mean when we say a meme is "true"?

I'll try and answer these to the best of my understanding, and try and sum it
all up at the end.

---

## What are the criteria for a meme being successful?

So, here is where we must define some terminology. Memes seem to come in two
parts, an image and a caption. The combination of the two make an *instance*
of a meme. The image itself is then *the meme*. I make this distinction because
the set of instances is larger than the set of memes. There are some pictures
which are very commonly used as the basis for a caption.

These memes are arguably the most successful, judging by the original criteria
by which memes are defined:

- They are ubiquitous. Websites exist for the sole purpose of documenting each
  of these memes, their history and pop culture references.
- They are adaptable to change, the importance of which will be familiar to
  anyone familiar with success in terms of evolution. When the same image can
  be used with many captions, it is obviously able to be used in a wider
  variety of situations and contexts. This means that the base image can
  spread further and so be more successful as a meme.

So, we can easily say that the criteria for a successful *meme* (as
opposed to an *instance*) is that it lends itself well to narrating or
complementing a wide variety of contexts in which a meme might be used. Our
question now becomes: what makes a meme versatile in this way?

Taking some very common memes as examples, it seems the most obvious answer is
for the meme to be an extract or sample from an existing element of 
pop-culture. Memes like "one does not simply" or others which derive from
films are good examples. Other memes which are more abstract in what they
depict seem to grow more organically from small beginnings. In this case, it
may simply be that because the image is more abstract in nature, and not
already tied to a particular caption or narrative, they are inevitably more
flexible.

The problem of why a *meme* can become successful is then somewhat obvious.
Indeed, it must simply be adaptable enough to be used in a wide variety of
situations, and for others to build upon it having seen an instance of it
already.

Why then might an *instance* of a meme might become successful? Success for
an instance is different to success for a meme. Relative to memes, instances
tend to have a much shorter life cycle. Often jumping into the fore and
then receding as new instances take their place in the communal attention span.
Occasionally an instance might re-surface however, and will likely do so under
the same conditions as when it was first created.

Instances of memes can be created for innumerable reasons, but most commonly
seem to be created in response to topical events, or on the whim of a creator
who has noticed some *truth* which they want to express. The success of an
instance is then a function of how accurately, relatably or humorously it
communicates the authors response to the event or truth.

The topic of truth in the context of memes, and why it arrises is dealt with
later.


## Given the context in which they are used, why are they used?

Why do we use memes? Well, I think the main reason is they are natural
consequence of the constraints on communication the internet places on us.

Memes are concise, *relatable*, graphical and **shared**. They represent or
express a communal experience which does not require the physical presence of
another person to be a part of. This is an inherent difficulty that the
internet presents us with. When we cannot *see* the people we are communicating
with, how do we build a community? All communities are built on shared values
or experiences, and memes are a fantastically effective way of building
these shared values in a constrained environment like the internet.

In the real world, shared values are built through dialogue and discussion.
While the internet is amenable to this, it is a poor substitute for
real discussion and debate in person.

Long, nuanced discussion of complex topics on the internet is not an easy
thing to achieve or take part in. In the absence of facial cues and the
ability to assume the qualified nature of a statement, everything is taken at
face value and is therefore suseptible to (sometimes willful)
misunderstanding.

Memes and other concise methods of expression or reaction (looking at you,
Twitter) are perfect in this scenario because they are atomic in how they are
interpreted. That is, they are often too short to really contain nuance or
allow for any confidence in extrapolating meaning from them. They can be
safely taken at face value, and are so we can be confident in our understanding
of them, and therefore easily build confidence in our communities shared values
as expressed by the meme, or instance of the meme.

Even better, many memes (as opposed to instances) are very distinct facial
expressions. Sometimes even caricatures of them. When partnered with a
caption, we can get a very clear sense of *how* the author wants the caption
to be read or interpreted. It helps us to imagine the author expressing the
meme in person. Because there may be many instances of a particular meme, we
can become practiced at quickly reading and interpreting a caption in a
particlar way, just as in real life we tailor our understanding of a
conversation based on the facial cues of the speaker.

So in short, I think we create and consume memes to build a sense of community
or shared values which we are otherwise unable or unwilling to foster due to
the nature of the internet as a medium. In an environment which otherwise makes
it impossible to reliably empathise with other people, we instead create small
expressions, which are inherently easy to relate to, build upon and share with
others.

The implications for simply bypassing the problem of nuanced expression on the
internet are interesting. By reverting to using memes as atomic units of
expression, taken literally and at face value, we have almost regressed in
terms of language back to a time before we expressed ourselves in complex
sentences in the real world. We have a new "internet-word", one that is more
expressive than a word in the traditional sense, but is not used to construct
sentences, and that cannot be decomposed into smaller units as a normal
sentence can.

Heavy consumers of memes might read all of this a think "*duh*" (accompanied
by an appropriate mental picture of a meme, obviously). Fair enough, this
text is for my benefit. Not yours. I said so at the beginning.

## Why are certain memes more significant for different internet subcultures?

It is curious that some corners or sub-cultures of the internet will often
adopt a meme, or part of a meme as a kind of mascot, representative of their
community.

I think that this is a response to a paradox that the ubiquity of memes can
raise. Namely, if the success of meme is defined in terms of its ubiquity,
and the reason we use memes is to build a sense of community, then how
does one community distinguish themselves from another when they all use the
same meme? We want instances of memes to be successful, but also distinct and
recognisable to our community.

The best example of this I can think of is the adoption of "pepe the frog"
by the alt-right. By using pepe in in the meme instance, it was possible for
members of the alt-right to immediately apply a context to the meme, and
be confident of what the meme was expressing.

## What do we gain from using them? What do we loose?

Clearly, I think that what we gain from using memes is an unambiguous mode of
expression which lends itself well to building a sense of community or 
belonging in a medium in which can otherwise be difficult to express oneself
in a manner conducive to empathy or unambiguity.

In terms of what we loose, I am unsure. It is important to point out that many
people do express themselves clearly, concisely and eloquently on the internet.
There is however questionable intersection between those who consume memes
regularly and those who will attempt to express themselves in a long, nuanced
piece of prose.

Arguably a danger exists for those who's main method of interaction with
others is through memes on the internet. It is easy to imagine a kind of
stereotypical loner who over time looses their ability to express themselves
articulately in person, or in prose through lack of practice and exposure.
How common this is I could not say, though anecdotally I certainly know
people who fall into this category. That said, the complaint that the
contemporary mode of expression is a degradation of that which came before it
has a very long history. By virtue of its long history, I think it can also
be safely invalidated. Again though, it would be deeply short sighted to
ignore it completely.

## What do we mean when we say a meme is "true"?

TBD

---

## Summary

TBD

Commit message:

Started on truth of memes.  On branch master  Your branch is ahead of 'origin/master' by 8 commits.    (use "git push" to publish your local commits)
 Changes to be committed:
	modified:   on-memes/index.md

on-memes/index.md, after:

---
title: On Memes
layout: layout
---

This is my attempt to wrap my head around memes.

---

The word "*meme*" was coined by Richard Dawkins. He wanted a short hand way of
describing a "replicator", a unit of self-perpetuation. His primary context
for using this was genetics and evolutionary theory. A gene / replicator /
meme is successful if it is able to spread wide enough among a
population such that it becomes ubiquitous within that population.

*"We need a name for the new replicator, a noun that conveys the idea of a unit
of cultural transmission, or a unit of imitation. 'Mimeme' comes from a
suitable Greek root, but I want a monosyllable that sounds a bit like 'gene'.
TYGO DANS classicist friends will forgive me if I abbreviate mimeme to meme.
If it is any consolation, it could alternatively be thought of as being
related to 'memory', or to the French word même. It should be pronounced to
rhyme with 'cream'."* - Dawkins, Richard (1989), The Selfish Gene (2 ed.),
Oxford University Press, p. 192, ISBN 0-19-286092-5,

Now the term has mutated (as only a replicator can) into any idea, concept or
fad which spreads quickly in society, usually using the internet as its
transmission medium. More specifically, *meme* refers to that particular
combination of image and witty(ish) or humorous caption. It is this class of
meme that I want to understand.

---

We know them when we see them, but why they have become so ubiquitous is a
much more interesting question than what they are. Especially in the age of
the internet and social media, they are so commonplace that we don't really
stop and think why we use them, or what we use them for. The usual reaction
to a meme is to elicit a shallow grin, nod of approval (usually accompanied by
a turn down of the jowls), teeth sucking or an insincere and exaggerated 
expression of shock at the "truth" of the meme.

So here are some questions I have:
- What are the criteria for a meme being successful?
- Given the context in which they are used, why are they used?
- Why do certain memes take on more significance for different internet
  subcultures?
- What do we gain from using them? What do we loose?
- What do we mean when we say a meme is "true"?

I'll try and answer these to the best of my understanding, and try and sum it
all up at the end.

---

## What are the criteria for a meme being successful?

So, here is where we must define some terminology. Memes seem to come in two
parts, an image and a caption. The combination of the two make an *instance*
of a meme. The image itself is then *the meme*. I make this distinction because
the set of instances is larger than the set of memes. There are some pictures
which are very commonly used as the basis for a caption.

These memes are arguably the most successful, judging by the original criteria
by which memes are defined:

- They are ubiquitous. Websites exist for the sole purpose of documenting each
  of these memes, their history and pop culture references.
- They are adaptable to change, the importance of which will be familiar to
  anyone familiar with success in terms of evolution. When the same image can
  be used with many captions, it is obviously able to be used in a wider
  variety of situations and contexts. This means that the base image can
  spread further and so be more successful as a meme.

So, we can easily say that the criteria for a successful *meme* (as
opposed to an *instance*) is that it lends itself well to narrating or
complementing a wide variety of contexts in which a meme might be used. Our
question now becomes: what makes a meme versatile in this way?

Taking some very common memes as examples, it seems the most obvious answer is
for the meme to be an extract or sample from an existing element of 
pop-culture. Memes like "one does not simply" or others which derive from
films are good examples. Other memes which are more abstract in what they
depict seem to grow more organically from small beginnings. In this case, it
may simply be that because the image is more abstract in nature, and not
already tied to a particular caption or narrative, they are inevitably more
flexible.

The problem of why a *meme* can become successful is then somewhat obvious.
Indeed, it must simply be adaptable enough to be used in a wide variety of
situations, and for others to build upon it having seen an instance of it
already.

Why then might an *instance* of a meme might become successful? Success for
an instance is different to success for a meme. Relative to memes, instances
tend to have a much shorter life cycle. Often jumping into the fore and
then receding as new instances take their place in the communal attention span.
Occasionally an instance might re-surface however, and will likely do so under
the same conditions as when it was first created.

Instances of memes can be created for innumerable reasons, but most commonly
seem to be created in response to topical events, or on the whim of a creator
who has noticed some *truth* which they want to express. The success of an
instance is then a function of how accurately, relatably or humorously it
communicates the authors response to the event or truth.

The topic of truth in the context of memes, and why it arrises is dealt with
later.


## Given the context in which they are used, why are they used?

Why do we use memes? Well, I think the main reason is they are natural
consequence of the constraints on communication the internet places on us.

Memes are concise, *relatable*, graphical and **shared**. They represent or
express a communal experience which does not require the physical presence of
another person to be a part of. This is an inherent difficulty that the
internet presents us with. When we cannot *see* the people we are communicating
with, how do we build a community? All communities are built on shared values
or experiences, and memes are a fantastically effective way of building
these shared values in a constrained environment like the internet.

In the real world, shared values are built through dialogue and discussion.
While the internet is amenable to this, it is a poor substitute for
real discussion and debate in person.

Long, nuanced discussion of complex topics on the internet is not an easy
thing to achieve or take part in. In the absence of facial cues and the
ability to assume the qualified nature of a statement, everything is taken at
face value and is therefore suseptible to (sometimes willful)
misunderstanding.

Memes and other concise methods of expression or reaction (looking at you,
Twitter) are perfect in this scenario because they are atomic in how they are
interpreted. That is, they are often too short to really contain nuance or
allow for any confidence in extrapolating meaning from them. They can be
safely taken at face value, and are so we can be confident in our understanding
of them, and therefore easily build confidence in our communities shared values
as expressed by the meme, or instance of the meme.

Even better, many memes (as opposed to instances) are very distinct facial
expressions. Sometimes even caricatures of them. When partnered with a
caption, we can get a very clear sense of *how* the author wants the caption
to be read or interpreted. It helps us to imagine the author expressing the
meme in person. Because there may be many instances of a particular meme, we
can become practiced at quickly reading and interpreting a caption in a
particlar way, just as in real life we tailor our understanding of a
conversation based on the facial cues of the speaker.

So in short, I think we create and consume memes to build a sense of community
or shared values which we are otherwise unable or unwilling to foster due to
the nature of the internet as a medium. In an environment which otherwise makes
it impossible to reliably empathise with other people, we instead create small
expressions, which are inherently easy to relate to, build upon and share with
others.

The implications for simply bypassing the problem of nuanced expression on the
internet are interesting. By reverting to using memes as atomic units of
expression, taken literally and at face value, we have almost regressed in
terms of language back to a time before we expressed ourselves in complex
sentences in the real world. We have a new "internet-word", one that is more
expressive than a word in the traditional sense, but is not used to construct
sentences, and that cannot be decomposed into smaller units as a normal
sentence can.

Heavy consumers of memes might read all of this a think "*duh*" (accompanied
by an appropriate mental picture of a meme, obviously). Fair enough, this
text is for my benefit. Not yours. I said so at the beginning.

## Why are certain memes more significant for different internet subcultures?

It is curious that some corners or sub-cultures of the internet will often
adopt a meme, or part of a meme as a kind of mascot, representative of their
community.

I think that this is a response to a paradox that the ubiquity of memes can
raise. Namely, if the success of meme is defined in terms of its ubiquity,
and the reason we use memes is to build a sense of community, then how
does one community distinguish themselves from another when they all use the
same meme? We want instances of memes to be successful, but also distinct and
recognisable to our community.

The best example of this I can think of is the adoption of "pepe the frog"
by the alt-right. By using pepe in in the meme instance, it was possible for
members of the alt-right to immediately apply a context to the meme, and
be confident of what the meme was expressing.

## What do we gain from using them? What do we loose?

Clearly, I think that what we gain from using memes is an unambiguous mode of
expression which lends itself well to building a sense of community or 
belonging in a medium in which can otherwise be difficult to express oneself
in a manner conducive to empathy or unambiguity.

In terms of what we loose, I am unsure. It is important to point out that many
people do express themselves clearly, concisely and eloquently on the internet.
There is however questionable intersection between those who consume memes
regularly and those who will attempt to express themselves in a long, nuanced
piece of prose.

Arguably a danger exists for those who's main method of interaction with
others is through memes on the internet. It is easy to imagine a kind of
stereotypical loner who over time looses their ability to express themselves
articulately in person, or in prose through lack of practice and exposure.
How common this is I could not say, though anecdotally I certainly know
people who fall into this category. That said, the complaint that the
contemporary mode of expression is a degradation of that which came before it
has a very long history. By virtue of its long history, I think it can also
be safely invalidated. Again though, it would be deeply short sighted to
ignore it completely.

## What do we mean when we say a meme is "true"?

A common reaction to instances of memes I have seen is an expression of how
"true" it is. Description of a meme as "true" is almost always used
positively, and is probably the single best qualitative metric of how
successful a meme is.

I think people say this to express or emphasise just how relatable or accurate
they find a particular instance of a meme.

---

## Summary

TBD
